UCSC Pathway Tab Format

Paradigm requires provided pathway files to be provided in the UCSC
Pathway Tab Format. This format is designed to be an extremely simple
representation of a pathway. Each line in the file either defines the
type of an entity, or an interaction between two entities. Entity
definition lines are distinguished from interaction lines by the
number of fields on the line: entity definitions have two
tab-separated fields, whereas interaction lines have three
tab-separated fields.

A simple example:

   protein     TP53
   protein     MDM2
   abstract    apoptosis
   MDM2        TP53         -a|
   TP53        apoptosis    -a>

This example consists of three lines defining entities, followed by
two lines defining interactions.

Entity Definition Lines

An entity definition line is a two-field tab-delimited line that
associates a biological type (the first field) to an identifier (the
second field). In the example above, TP53 and MDM2 are identified as
proteins, and apoptosis as abstract (an abbreviation for "abstract
process"). Any identifier can be used as the biological type, but
currently these are in common use:

   protein       a protein-coding gene **
   chemical      a small-molecule, such as GTP
   complex       a non-covalently-bound collection of other molecules,
                 such as proteins, small molecules, etc.
   family        a gene family that performs a similar function (e.g.
                 the RAS family, consisting of HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS)
   abstract      an abstract process, such as apoptosis

If an entity ID is encountered in a UCSC Pathway Tab format, and it is
not explicitly assigned an entity type, then the entity defaults to
the 'protein' type.

Interaction Definition Lines

Interaction definition lines consist of three tab-separated fields:

 parent_id  child_id  interaction_type

Currently, all our interaction types are directional, and there is no
support for undirected edges. Therefore it's important to maintain the
order of the first and second field. The edge types currently in use
are:

   -a>          the parent promotes the activity of the child
   -a|          the parent inhibits the activity of the child
   -t>          the parent transcriptionally activates the child
   -t|          the parent transcriptionally inhibits the child
   -ap>         the parent activates the child, and either the parent
                or child is an abstract process is an abstract process
   -ap|         the parent inhibits the child, and either the parent
                or child is an abstract process is an abstract process
   component>   the child is a complex, and the parent is a component
                of that complex
   member>      the child is a gene family, and the parent is a
                component of that family
